README.md, before:

# 🏥 ADR Analysis - AI-Powered Medication Risk Assessment

A comprehensive web application that uses **real FDA adverse event data** and **AI analysis** to assess medication risks and provide personalized health recommendations.

![React](https://img.shields.io/badge/React-18.0.0-blue)
![TypeScript](https://img.shields.io/badge/TypeScript-5.0.0-blue)
![Node.js](https://img.shields.io/badge/Node.js-18.0.0-green)
![FDA API](https://img.shields.io/badge/FDA_API-Integration-orange)
![AI Analysis](https://img.shields.io/badge/AI_Analysis-GPT--4o-purple)

## 🎯 Project Overview

ADR Analysis is a cutting-edge healthcare application that combines:
- **Real FDA Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS) data**
- **Advanced AI analysis** using GPT-4o
- **Personalized risk assessment** based on patient health profiles
- **International drug name mapping** for global accessibility

## ✨ Key Features

### 🔬 **FDA API Integration**
- **Real-time FDA data** from the Adverse Event Reporting System
- **Drug name mapping** (paracetamol → acetaminophen, etc.)
- **Multiple search strategies** for maximum data retrieval
- **Fallback system** for common medications

### 🤖 **AI-Powered Analysis**
- **GPT-4o integration** for intelligent risk assessment
- **Personalized recommendations** based on health profiles
- **Specialist recommendations** from 18 medical specialties
- **Alternative medication suggestions**

### 👥 **Multi-User System**
- **Patient Dashboard** - Medication analysis and health tracking
- **Doctor Dashboard** - Patient management and risk assessment
- **AI Assistant** - 24/7 health consultation with image analysis

### 📊 **Comprehensive Reporting**
- **Risk percentage calculation** based on FDA data
- **Detailed adverse event analysis**
- **Lifestyle recommendations** (Diet, Exercise, Monitoring)
- **Historical assessment tracking**

## 🚀 Quick Start

### Prerequisites
- Node.js 18+ 
- npm or yarn
- GitHub API token (for AI features)

### Installation

1. **Clone the repository**
```bash
git clone https://github.com/Rajatraikar6755/ADR-Analysis.git
cd ADR-Analysis
```

2. **Install frontend dependencies**
```bash
npm install
```

3. **Install backend dependencies**
```bash
cd backend
npm install
```

4. **Set up environment variables**
```bash
# Create .env file in backend directory
GITHUB_TOKEN=your_github_token_here
```

5. **Start the backend server**
```bash
cd backend
npm start
```

6. **Start the frontend application**
```bash
# In a new terminal, from project root
npm run dev
```

7. **Open your browser**
```
http://localhost:5173
```

## 🏗️ Architecture

```
ADR-Analysis/
├── src/                    # Frontend React/TypeScript
│   ├── components/         # UI components
│   ├── pages/             # Application pages
│   ├── contexts/          # React contexts
│   └── integrations/      # External integrations
├── backend/               # Node.js/Express server
│   ├── fda-api.js        # FDA API integration
│   ├── index.js          # Main server file
│   └── package.json      # Backend dependencies
└── README.md             # This file
```

## 🔧 FDA API Integration

### How It Works
1. **User enters medication** (e.g., "paracetamol")
2. **Drug name mapping** converts to FDA-recognized name ("acetaminophen")
3. **Multiple search strategies** query FDA database
4. **Real adverse event data** is retrieved from FAERS
5. **AI analysis** uses this data for risk assessment

### Supported Drug Mappings
- `paracetamol` → `acetaminophen`
- `tylenol` → `acetaminophen`
- `advil` → `ibuprofen`
- `motrin` → `ibuprofen`
- `lipitor` → `atorvastatin`
- `prilosec` → `omeprazole`
- `zithromax` → `azithromycin`

### Search Strategies
1. **Exact match** with generic and brand names
2. **Partial match** with generic name only
3. **Partial match** with brand name only
4. **Wildcard search** for broader matches
5. **Substance name search** for chemical compounds
6. **Fallback system** for common medications

## 📱 Features Demo

### Patient Features
- **Medication Risk Assessment** - Analyze current medications with FDA data
- **Health Profile Management** - Store and update health information
- **Find Doctor** - Search for specialists based on AI recommendations
- **AI Assistant** - Chat with AI for health queries and image analysis

### Doctor Features
- **Patient Management** - View and manage patient records
- **Risk Assessment Tools** - Professional-grade analysis tools
- **Treatment Recommendations** - AI-powered treatment suggestions

### AI Assistant
- **Text Chat** - Ask health-related questions
- **Image Analysis** - Upload medical images for AI analysis
- **24/7 Availability** - Always available for consultation

## 🧪 Testing Results

✅ **FDA API Success Rate**: 100% for common medications
✅ **Drug Name Mapping**: International names work perfectly
✅ **AI Integration**: Real FDA data flows to AI analysis
✅ **Risk Assessment**: Accurate calculations based on real-world data

### Example FDA Data Retrieved
- **Paracetamol**: `DRUG INEFFECTIVE, PAIN, FATIGUE, OVERDOSE, DRUG DEPENDENCE`
- **Ibuprofen**: `DRUG INEFFECTIVE, PAIN, FATIGUE, NAUSEA, HEADACHE`
- **Aspirin**: `FATIGUE, NAUSEA, DRUG INEFFECTIVE, DYSPNOEA, OFF LABEL USE`
- **Metformin**: `NAUSEA, BLOOD GLUCOSE INCREASED, DIARRHOEA, DRUG INEFFECTIVE, FATIGUE`

## 🔒 Security & Privacy

- **No medical advice** - AI provides information only, not medical recommendations
- **Data privacy** - Patient data stored locally
- **Secure API calls** - FDA API calls use proper authentication
- **Disclaimer system** - Clear medical disclaimers throughout the application

## 🛠️ Technology Stack

### Frontend
- **React 18** - Modern UI framework
- **TypeScript** - Type-safe development
- **Tailwind CSS** - Utility-first styling
- **Shadcn/ui** - Beautiful component library
- **Vite** - Fast build tool

### Backend
- **Node.js** - Server runtime
- **Express.js** - Web framework
- **FDA API** - Real adverse event data
- **GitHub AI Models** - GPT-4o integration
- **Multer** - File upload handling

### APIs & Integrations
- **FDA Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS)** - Real medication data
- **GitHub AI Models** - Advanced AI analysis
- **RxNav API** - Medication name suggestions

## 📈 Project Impact

- **Real-world data integration** with FDA database
- **Improved medication safety** through AI analysis
- **Global accessibility** with international drug name support
- **Professional-grade tools** for healthcare providers
- **24/7 AI assistance** for health queries

## 🤝 Contributing

We welcome contributions! Please see our [Contributing Guidelines](CONTRIBUTING.md) for details.

### Development Setup
1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch
3. Make your changes
4. Add tests if applicable
5. Submit a pull request

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## 🆘 Support

- **Issues**: [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/Rajatraikar6755/ADR-Analysis/issues)
- **Documentation**: [Wiki](https://github.com/Rajatraikar6755/ADR-Analysis/wiki)
- **Backend Setup**: See [backend/README.md](backend/README.md)

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- **FDA** for providing the Adverse Event Reporting System API
- **GitHub** for AI model integration
- **OpenFDA** for comprehensive medication data
- **React & TypeScript** communities for excellent tooling

---

<div align="center">

**Built with ❤️ for better healthcare through AI and real-world data**

[![GitHub stars](https://img.shields.io/github/stars/Rajatraikar6755/ADR-Analysis?style=social)](https://github.com/Rajatraikar6755/ADR-Analysis/stargazers)
[![GitHub forks](https://img.shields.io/github/forks/Rajatraikar6755/ADR-Analysis?style=social)](https://github.com/Rajatraikar6755/ADR-Analysis/network)
[![GitHub issues](https://img.shields.io/github/issues/Rajatraikar6755/ADR-Analysis)](https://github.com/Rajatraikar6755/ADR-Analysis/issues)

</div>

Commit message:

Update AI model configuration and documentation
- Add configurable AI_MODEL constant for easy model switching
- Update documentation to reflect current GPT-4o usage
- Add AI model configuration section to README
- Prepare for future GPT-5 integration when available
- Add comments about available models and upgrade path

README.md, after:

# 🏥 ADR Analysis - AI-Powered Medication Risk Assessment

A comprehensive web application that uses **real FDA adverse event data** and **AI analysis** to assess medication risks and provide personalized health recommendations.

![React](https://img.shields.io/badge/React-18.0.0-blue)
![TypeScript](https://img.shields.io/badge/TypeScript-5.0.0-blue)
![Node.js](https://img.shields.io/badge/Node.js-18.0.0-green)
![FDA API](https://img.shields.io/badge/FDA_API-Integration-orange)
![AI Analysis](https://img.shields.io/badge/AI_Analysis-GPT--4o-purple)

## 🎯 Project Overview

ADR Analysis is a cutting-edge healthcare application that combines:
- **Real FDA Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS) data**
- **Advanced AI analysis** using GPT-4o
- **Personalized risk assessment** based on patient health profiles
- **International drug name mapping** for global accessibility

## ✨ Key Features

### 🔬 **FDA API Integration**
- **Real-time FDA data** from the Adverse Event Reporting System
- **Drug name mapping** (paracetamol → acetaminophen, etc.)
- **Multiple search strategies** for maximum data retrieval
- **Fallback system** for common medications

### 🤖 **AI-Powered Analysis**
- **Latest AI model integration** (GPT-4o) for intelligent risk assessment
- **Personalized recommendations** based on health profiles
- **Specialist recommendations** from 18 medical specialties
- **Alternative medication suggestions**
- **Configurable model selection** for future upgrades

### 👥 **Multi-User System**
- **Patient Dashboard** - Medication analysis and health tracking
- **Doctor Dashboard** - Patient management and risk assessment
- **AI Assistant** - 24/7 health consultation with image analysis

### 📊 **Comprehensive Reporting**
- **Risk percentage calculation** based on FDA data
- **Detailed adverse event analysis**
- **Lifestyle recommendations** (Diet, Exercise, Monitoring)
- **Historical assessment tracking**

## 🚀 Quick Start

### Prerequisites
- Node.js 18+ 
- npm or yarn
- GitHub API token (for AI features)

### Installation

1. **Clone the repository**
```bash
git clone https://github.com/Rajatraikar6755/ADR-Analysis.git
cd ADR-Analysis
```

2. **Install frontend dependencies**
```bash
npm install
```

3. **Install backend dependencies**
```bash
cd backend
npm install
```

4. **Set up environment variables**
```bash
# Create .env file in backend directory
GITHUB_TOKEN=your_github_token_here
```

5. **Start the backend server**
```bash
cd backend
npm start
```

6. **Start the frontend application**
```bash
# In a new terminal, from project root
npm run dev
```

7. **Open your browser**
```
http://localhost:5173
```

## 🏗️ Architecture

```
ADR-Analysis/
├── src/                    # Frontend React/TypeScript
│   ├── components/         # UI components
│   ├── pages/             # Application pages
│   ├── contexts/          # React contexts
│   └── integrations/      # External integrations
├── backend/               # Node.js/Express server
│   ├── fda-api.js        # FDA API integration
│   ├── index.js          # Main server file
│   └── package.json      # Backend dependencies
└── README.md             # This file
```

## 🔧 FDA API Integration

### How It Works
1. **User enters medication** (e.g., "paracetamol")
2. **Drug name mapping** converts to FDA-recognized name ("acetaminophen")
3. **Multiple search strategies** query FDA database
4. **Real adverse event data** is retrieved from FAERS
5. **AI analysis** uses this data for risk assessment

## 🤖 AI Model Configuration

### Current Model
The application uses **GPT-4o** (the latest stable model) for AI analysis. This model provides:
- **Advanced reasoning** for complex medical data analysis
- **Accurate risk assessment** based on FDA adverse event data
- **Reliable JSON output** for structured responses
- **Image analysis capabilities** for medical image processing

### Available Models
The system is configured to easily switch between available models:
- `openai/gpt-4o` - Latest stable model (current)
- `openai/gpt-4o-mini` - Faster, more cost-effective option
- `anthropic/claude-3-5-sonnet` - Alternative AI model

### Future Model Updates
When GPT-5 becomes publicly available through GitHub AI, you can easily update the model by changing the `AI_MODEL` constant in:
- `backend/index.js`
- `api/ai-assistant.js`

### Supported Drug Mappings
- `paracetamol` → `acetaminophen`
- `tylenol` → `acetaminophen`
- `advil` → `ibuprofen`
- `motrin` → `ibuprofen`
- `lipitor` → `atorvastatin`
- `prilosec` → `omeprazole`
- `zithromax` → `azithromycin`

### Search Strategies
1. **Exact match** with generic and brand names
2. **Partial match** with generic name only
3. **Partial match** with brand name only
4. **Wildcard search** for broader matches
5. **Substance name search** for chemical compounds
6. **Fallback system** for common medications

## 📱 Features Demo

### Patient Features
- **Medication Risk Assessment** - Analyze current medications with FDA data
- **Health Profile Management** - Store and update health information
- **Find Doctor** - Search for specialists based on AI recommendations
- **AI Assistant** - Chat with AI for health queries and image analysis

### Doctor Features
- **Patient Management** - View and manage patient records
- **Risk Assessment Tools** - Professional-grade analysis tools
- **Treatment Recommendations** - AI-powered treatment suggestions

### AI Assistant
- **Text Chat** - Ask health-related questions
- **Image Analysis** - Upload medical images for AI analysis
- **24/7 Availability** - Always available for consultation

## 🧪 Testing Results

✅ **FDA API Success Rate**: 100% for common medications
✅ **Drug Name Mapping**: International names work perfectly
✅ **AI Integration**: Real FDA data flows to AI analysis
✅ **Risk Assessment**: Accurate calculations based on real-world data

### Example FDA Data Retrieved
- **Paracetamol**: `DRUG INEFFECTIVE, PAIN, FATIGUE, OVERDOSE, DRUG DEPENDENCE`
- **Ibuprofen**: `DRUG INEFFECTIVE, PAIN, FATIGUE, NAUSEA, HEADACHE`
- **Aspirin**: `FATIGUE, NAUSEA, DRUG INEFFECTIVE, DYSPNOEA, OFF LABEL USE`
- **Metformin**: `NAUSEA, BLOOD GLUCOSE INCREASED, DIARRHOEA, DRUG INEFFECTIVE, FATIGUE`

## 🔒 Security & Privacy

- **No medical advice** - AI provides information only, not medical recommendations
- **Data privacy** - Patient data stored locally
- **Secure API calls** - FDA API calls use proper authentication
- **Disclaimer system** - Clear medical disclaimers throughout the application

## 🛠️ Technology Stack

### Frontend
- **React 18** - Modern UI framework
- **TypeScript** - Type-safe development
- **Tailwind CSS** - Utility-first styling
- **Shadcn/ui** - Beautiful component library
- **Vite** - Fast build tool

### Backend
- **Node.js** - Server runtime
- **Express.js** - Web framework
- **FDA API** - Real adverse event data
- **GitHub AI Models** - Latest AI model integration (GPT-4o)
- **Multer** - File upload handling

### APIs & Integrations
- **FDA Adverse Event Reporting System (FAERS)** - Real medication data
- **GitHub AI Models** - Advanced AI analysis (GPT-4o)
- **RxNav API** - Medication name suggestions

## 📈 Project Impact

- **Real-world data integration** with FDA database
- **Improved medication safety** through AI analysis
- **Global accessibility** with international drug name support
- **Professional-grade tools** for healthcare providers
- **24/7 AI assistance** for health queries

## 🤝 Contributing

We welcome contributions! Please see our [Contributing Guidelines](CONTRIBUTING.md) for details.

### Development Setup
1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch
3. Make your changes
4. Add tests if applicable
5. Submit a pull request

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## 🆘 Support

- **Issues**: [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/Rajatraikar6755/ADR-Analysis/issues)
- **Documentation**: [Wiki](https://github.com/Rajatraikar6755/ADR-Analysis/wiki)
- **Backend Setup**: See [backend/README.md](backend/README.md)

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- **FDA** for providing the Adverse Event Reporting System API
- **GitHub** for AI model integration
- **OpenFDA** for comprehensive medication data
- **React & TypeScript** communities for excellent tooling

---

<div align="center">

**Built with ❤️ for better healthcare through AI and real-world data**

[![GitHub stars](https://img.shields.io/github/stars/Rajatraikar6755/ADR-Analysis?style=social)](https://github.com/Rajatraikar6755/ADR-Analysis/stargazers)
[![GitHub forks](https://img.shields.io/github/forks/Rajatraikar6755/ADR-Analysis?style=social)](https://github.com/Rajatraikar6755/ADR-Analysis/network)
[![GitHub issues](https://img.shields.io/github/issues/Rajatraikar6755/ADR-Analysis)](https://github.com/Rajatraikar6755/ADR-Analysis/issues)

</div>
